Of the Avatars of Maha Vishnu, the Fourth
One is the Narasimha Avatar.
If there are any children here, careful!!
Something really frightening is coming up!
Snap!!
This Avatar, Narasimha Avatar..
Anger.
The very representation of Anger.
Justified Anger.
The boy tells his dad, Hiranyakashyap..
“He will be in this pillar.
He will be in this little speck of dust.
You cannot destroy Him.
He is the Greatest.
He is everywhere!
He is EVERYWHERE.
Don’t mess with him!
He will beat the living daylights out of you!
Beware!”…
There is a
message there!
Namasthe!
Digitally!
Digit — Ally!
Friend!
This is Claude Shannon.
The Father of the Information Age, they call
him.
He didn’t win the Nobel Prize..
Didn’t become a celebrity like Richard Feynman
or Albert Einstein.
But, the Father!
And, not for nothing!
Way back in 1948, he sowed the seeds of everything
digital that even today, seventy years later,
we are paying homage to him.
He is a scientist!
He invented a new field called Information
Theory.
And, just like our old friend Newton did,
to further the science that he invented, he
realised that a new kind of mathematics was
needed, and he went ahead and formulated the
mathematics needed for probabilistic communication
theory.
Simple!
Elegant!
Profound!
And, not just that..
If you flip through this book, you will learn
too..
A Mind At Play — He was an engineer also
it seems.
An amazing engineer.
Unique combination!
A scientist, a mathematician, and an engineer.
He has even engineered a maze-solving mechanical
mouse!
Way back!!
Seventy years ago!
He is supposed to be the person who first
used the word “Bits”.
Binary Digits.
He confesses, “It wasn’t me.. a colleague
had used it in an internal memo, and I kinda
borrowed it..”
But, bits.
Information.
Noise versus Signal.
What is the theoretical maximum speed with
which a channel can take information, and
so on, he was the one who laid out first.
But..
Is he the originator of this “Bit” concept?
Let’s go a BIT earlier in time…
This man..
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz.
What all has be been in life?
Well..
Historian.
Lawyer.
Philosopher.
Mathematician.
Theologist.
Talked about God and godliness.
Physicist too!
This person, among the many many many things
he has done… he has a veritable museum of
things that he has left behind!
It contains letters, papers, unpublished content..
all his creation.
There, they found out that he had published
papers about digits.. not the ten-finger decimal
system type, but the binary (based on 0 and
1)… a mathematics that talked about binary
addition, subtraction, division, and multiplication!
Factoring!
But, was there any earthly use for this at
that time?
Too long ago..
1703.
Even electricity isn’t prevalent yet.
Magnetism, people haven’t figured it out
well yet.
Those were the times.
And, our man launches into lectures on Binary
Mathematics!
Shall we call this person the Father?
OR…
Should we go a bit earlier in time?
A LONG bit?!
Do you remember THIS person?
Lord Krishna.
The Eighth Avatar of Lord Vishnu.
And, this?
Arjunan.
The Bhagavad Gita, the book inside the book
of the Mahabharatha..
In Chapter Two itself, the 23rd Verse goes
like this.
A beautiful shloka — some of you may remember
and recall.
Nainam Chindanthi Shastraani.
Don’t think your weapons can affect This
in any way!
Your weapons can’t even touch It.
Nainam Dahathi Paavakaha..
Burn It with fire?
Nope!
Untouchable!
Na Chainam Kledayanthyaapo..
Aapo..
Water.
Don’t think you can wet It with water either.
Na Shoshayathi Maaruthaha.
The wind can’t dry It either!
Your weapons can’t touch It, fire can’t
destroy It, water can’t inundate It, wind
cannot dry It.
What is this IT?
Lord Krishna calls it the Soul..
“The people standing in the battlefield
against you, your uncles, your brothers, … don’t
think they are your relatives…
don’t think you are going to harm them with
your weapons…
Nothing can touch their Soul!”
That originating thought..
It runs for 18 chapters, but, early in the
book, Lord Krishna sets this out with great
clarity.
Is this then, the originating point for the
concept of … something that represents a
human being that is indestructible?
Something that stands firm, even after they
are long gone?
Those bits of data?
Those details?
Perhaps, is that what this “Soul” thing
is?
Or… should we go even further?
Remember this person?
This is the Fourth Avatar.
The boy, Prahaladha, says:- “You can’t
do anything to Him.
He is everywhere!
You are surrounded by Him!
Don’t mess with Him!
He will beat the living daylights out of you!
(Unnai undu illainnu aakkiduvaar!
— Tamil!)”
Undu — Yes, alive.
Illai — No, dead.
Undu — 1.
Illai — 0.
Zeroes and Ones.
Digitise!
That’s it!
So, .. this could probably be the originating
moment when we started understanding .. “Who
is a person”?
Perhaps the question is just about what the
legacy is that they leave behind!
Their written words, spoken words, their actions
perhaps, memories, all of that can be digitised..
We have encountered this idea earlier too.
I will place jump cards at the end of this
episode.
So, go, watch them too!
You will realise that we have talked about
this already.
But, there is so much more to say!
One of the interesting things that we can
take away, as a blessing, probably also as
a curse, thanks to this digitisation of everything,
is this!
Take a look at this!
This is a video file!
Could well be this video itself!
If I digitise it completely, in a way that
I can store it easily in a computer, or transmit
it easily through a network, this is how it
looks.
Zeroes and Ones…
Actually compressed into letters A through
F also.
0 to 9, A to F. All sorts of combinations
within those, encoded and buried.
Okay, how about a book?
An ePub book version 3, will look like this.
Again, a combination of letters and numbers!
Transferable!
At the speed of light!
Doesn’t weigh anything!
Doesn’t occupy space!
Can be shared with others!
Without affecting the original!
Can be made copies of!
That look exactly like the original!
Okay, how about a picture!
A picture like the ones I have posted here,
above, in this video screen..
Again, the moment you bring it down to the
level of bits and bytes, you cannot even tell
what they are!
Here is one more example!
This is a song!
This song too, will appear like this only.
Actually, this “internet”, that we are
all so happily, joyously, freely, enjoying?
A very important reason for it to remain free
in this commercialised world?
A world where clean water and healthy air
is being SOLD for money…
how come the Internet is nearly free?!
Have you thought about it?
Well, this is the secret.
If only the Internet operators could reliably
guess that the file you are transferring at
this moment is a video… the action you are
performing at the moment currently is a live
phone call… the document you are demanding
from there is just a plain textbook, this
is just a chat message, and could do such
a differentiation, at the level of the packet,
they will fleece you!
Burn a hole through your wallet!
It is too costly for the gatekeepers to keep
track of who is passing through the gate,
they are allowing everybody in..
Well.. just for a little longer only..
In a few years time, new technology will arrive.
An IPv6, a priority bit..
And, once they are stabilised, they will be
able to find out whether it is a video stream,
a text file, a book, a chat message, and according
to that format, just like they charge differential
fees for heavy vehicles (three hundred rupees!)
and two-wheelers (free pass!) in a highway
toll gate, but till then, enjoy the internet..
because, everything when abstracted to the
layer of Digits, bits and bytes, looks like
this!
Oh, one more big advantage because of this
abstractability!
If everything can be brought into a format
like this, from A to here, from B to here,
from C too here, .. then, how would it be
if I get it from A and give it out as B?
Shall we take a look?!
This?
Is Pi.
If you’ve been watching Quotidians, you’ll
surely know what Pi is!
This is…
The Sound of Pi!
Random!
Never repeating!
Going on forever!
How?
Well, just replace a musical note uniquely
for every digit!
Once that association is done, if you take
something that you received from mathematics…
bits and bytes.. and you supply that to an
audio instrument?!
This is what you get!
Well, this is nothing compared to my next
exhibit!
Take a look at this person!
His name is Neil Harbisson.
This is his passport photo.
Have you ever seen anybody wearing headphones
and other headgear in a passport photo??
They will let THIS guy though.
Why?
That would be because he is not WEARING technology,
he is not USING technology, he is WITH technology!
If you ask him his height, he won’t give
you a measurement up to the top of his head!
It would include the antenna and camera dangling
ABOVE his head!
Because, this is how he looks in real life!
And, that is because, Neil Harbisson has a
rare disease called achromatopsia.
Complete colour-blindness!
Imagine living a life that looks like old
and grainy black-and-white movies of yore!
He joined hands with a few researchers and
actually came up with a system that would
allow him to HEAR colours.
The ability to HEAR colours.
That third eye camera dangling in front of
his forehead?
Wherever he points that, whatever colour it
is in, he will HEAR that sound!
So, if he has to go to a funeral…, he will
wear a combination of orange and purple, it
seems.
Why?
That is because it sounds like a mournful
melody.
He had given a TED talk way back in 2012.
Wearing this head-dress embedded in the back
of his head.
And, when he got on to the stage, that RED
of TED?
This is how it sounded to him.
That’s how he hears..
no.. sees, TED!
If he listened to Mozart, he calls it a yellow
experience!
If he heard the old ring tone of a rotary
phone?
Green!
A person who brought sounds to the world of
colours, … now sees colour when he hears
sounds!
Do you get it?
This is possible because digits do not have
“types” or “categories”.
They are digits.
Binary.
Zero and One.
Black Mirror.
We have visited this series in Netflix quite
a few times.
There is an episode called The History of
You.
A fear-inducing spine-chilling episode.
A small contact lens placed over your eye,
records EVERYTHING.
Who they talk to, what they say, where they
sit, where they go, … everything is recorded.
Even after a person dies, the lens can be
retrieved and data replayed!
It is a true “life journal”.
It becomes a police criminal case, and I don’t
want to give away too much.
Please watch this episode!
Basically, the reverse also is possible.
In another Black Mirror episode, when you
see somebody, you get a lot of information
about them..
They have attempted it with Google Glass.
Many other companies have attempted this too.
Smart glasses.
There are many whistleblowers who complain
that this is a violation of privacy..
That this is not safe.
I am one of them too, at times!
But… this is happening, folks!
This is going to happen.
We are entering a world that is filled…
(Remember Prahalada?
Data EVERYWHERE.
In the pillar..
In the speck of dust too!
Nothing can be done to it!
Undu Illainnu…)
But…, out of the panic and the fear borne
out of this, .. something else has started
happening.
Everybody wants to leave!
One guy wants to delete his Instagram account.
Another wants to exit Twitter.
I want to quit Facebook says another..
Hey, wait…
You don’t need to quit.
Mark himself may fire you..!
Jokes apart, this has started happening too!
One of my good friends?
They will declare to me — “I am shutting
down Whatsapp.
I have deleted the App..” — and they will
return a week later.
Back to the App.
There is another friend of mine.
Remember this App?
A search engine like Google.
But, not Google itself.
A search engine that doesn’t take anything
from you.
But, gives you search results..
Quality may be… below par.
But, I will not steal any personal data from
you!
Privacy matters!
Yes, the exodus has started.
In fact, this is Pavel Durov.
CEO of Telegram.
He is posting promotional messages, inviting
people to move to Telegram, calling Whatsapp
evil!
I am not mocking at these people.
I realise that I am probably giving away some
information about myself that may come back
to bite me, I don’t know..
But, I go back to that “necessary evil”.
We are entering a world filled with data.
Those who store and use this data… we need
to hand this over only to trustworthy parties.
But.. saying you will never part with data,
that you will always use only incognito windows
for browsing, always erasing your digital
footprints and fingerprints…
well, the only feeling I get when I see you
do this is, “You are either paranoid, or
you are a criminal!”
Socrates said this long ago.
Thousands of years ago.
The undocumented life, the unexamined life,
is not worth living!
You must look back at what you have done,
the path you have come in, .. once in a while,
he says!
And, a way to see that?
All these tools!
Not just looking back at what you have done,
yourself, but what others have done too.
There is an App like this.
A website.
Story Corps is the name.
This company specialises in recording stories.
You can take this App to your grandma’s
place.
Ask her, “What did you want to become, as
a young girl?”
“Can you sing your favourite song just once
more please?”
“When you married Grandpa, what was his
first loving message to you?”
When you ask a couple of questions like these,
when the conversation starts flowing, and
gets recorded, and you can store it in a public
library, or in your own library, private,
but when that starts flowing, … this is
culture!
This will remain after you are long gone..
This is your…
SOUL!
This is your soul!
Saying you won’t gift this to humanity…
saying, you won’t leave this behind in a
way my descendants can see and enjoy and learn
from…
I feel it is probably not right.
1984.
A famous book.
By George Orwell.
Many say, there is a quote from the author,
like this, in that book:- “The most effective
way to destroy people is to deny and obliterate
their own understanding of their history.”
You don’t need weapons to destroy them!
Just make them lose touch with their own past.
Ponniyin Selvan, the book, has been around
for quite a long time.
But, until it appeared as a popular movie,
many didn’t know that such a grand temple
existed, that the kings had achieved so much,
that they had crossed oceans and reached foreign
lands.. that history.. and that history is
not just written by the winners, history of
the losers, history of the common man, history
of the person on the street, that oral history
has to be captured..
And to capture that?
Facebook, Twitter, Pinterest, YouTube, .. everybody
plays an important role.
They are capturing something.
Probably they are misusing the data that they
are collecting.
Probably we should leave Facebook and Twitter.
But, we need to be part of systems that are
this collective group.
The group where each of us gets to contribute
one little data droplet.
This wasn’t there in the original book.
The quote goes like this actually:- “Who
controls the past controls the future.
Who controls the present controls the past!”
But, means the same…
So, rule the past, change history!
As a closing thought, there is this product
called Ultrahuman.
I have been reading amazing reviews about
it.
Indian product.
Bengaluru-based.
It is a ring you can wear.
You can even gift it to your wife.
It tracks a lot of things!
From your heart rate, and …… so on..
All the way to the “Documented Self” that
we saw earlier..
The digital version of you!
Small steps forward towards that grand dream!
Far better and advanced than the Apple Watch!
I hear my wife telling me..
Was it for this silly thing that you put out
a full episode??
Come home, and let me take care of this once
and for all!
Anyway, we will meet again soon!
Thank you!